CAPIT, from the Latin word for “head,” caput, turns up in some important places. The head of a
ship is its captain, and the capital of a state or country is where the “head of state” works. A
capital letter stands head and shoulders above a lowercase letter, as well as at the head
(beginning) of a sentence.

ANTHROP comes from the Greek word for “human being.” So an anthropomorphic god, such
as Zeus or Athena, basically looks and acts like a human. And in Aesop's fables and many
animated cartoons, animals are usually anthropomorphized and behave exactly like furry, fourlegged
human beings.

KINE comes from the Greek word kinesis, meaning “movement.” Kinetic energy is the energy
of motion (as opposed to potential energy, the kind of energy held by a stretched elastic band).
Kinetic art is art that has moving parts, such as Alexander Calder's famous mobiles. And
cinema, the art of moving pictures, actually comes from the same kine- root as well.

DYNAM comes from the Greek dynamis, meaning “power.” A dyne is a unit used in measuring
force; an instrument that measures force is called a dynamometer. And when Alfred Nobel
invented a powerful explosive in 1867, he named it dynamite.

GRAD comes from the Latin noun gradus, “step” or “degree,” and the verb gradi, “to step,
walk.” A grade is a step up or down on a scale of some kind, and a gradual change takes place
in small steps.

REG, from the Latin regula, meaning “rule,” has given us many English words. Something
regular follows a rule of some kind, even if it's just a law of nature. A regime can be a form of
rule or government. To regulate an industry means to make and enforce rules, or regulations,
for it; removing such rules is called deregulation.

CRIT comes from a Greek verb that means “to judge” or “to decide.” So a film critic judges a
movie and tells us what's good or bad about it. Her critical opinion may convince us not to go,
or we may overlook any negative criticism and see it anyway.

JUR comes from the Latin verb jurare, “to swear, take an oath,” and the noun jus, “right or law.”
A jury, made up of jurors, makes judgments based on the law. And a personal injury was
originally something done to you that a court would find unjust.

PENT comes from the Greek word for “five.” The Pentagon in Washington, D.C., the world's
largest office building, has five sides just like any other pentagon. And a pentatonic scale in
music has only five notes, rather than the seven notes of the major or minor scale.

QUINT comes from the Latin word meaning “five.” Quintuplets are babies that come in sets of
five; about 60 U.S. families increase in size by that number every year.

BIO comes from the Greek word for “life,” and forms the base for many English words. Biology,
for instance, is the study of living forms and life processes; the biosphere is the entire area of
and above the earth where life can exist; and biotechnology is the use of living organisms to
create useful products.

GEN, which comes from the Greek genos, meaning “birth,” has generated dozens of English
words. A set of genes, for instance, gives birth to a living being. And a genealogy is a historical
map of your family, showing how each generation gave birth to the next.

FUNCT comes from the Latin verb fungi, “to perform, carry out.” If your car is functional, it's
able to perform its function of providing transportation. But a functional illiterate is a person
who, for all practical or functional purposes, might as well not be able to read or write at all.

MUT comes from the Latin mutare, “to change.” Plenty of science-fiction movies—Godzilla,
The Fly, The Incredible Shrinking Man—used to be made on the subject of weird mutations,
changes in normal people or animals that usually end up causing death and destruction. What
causes the unfortunate victim to mutate may be a mysterious or alien force, or perhaps invisible
radiation. Though the science in these films isn't always right on target, the scare factor of an
army of mutants can be hard to beat.

FRACT comes from the Latin verb frangere, “to break or shatter.” A fraction is one of the
pieces into which a whole can be broken, and a fracture is a break in a wall, a rock, or a bone.

TELE has as its basic meanings “distant” or “at a distance.” A telescope is for looking at far-off
objects; a camera's telephoto lens magnifies a distant scene for a photograph; and a television
lets us watch things taking place far away.

PHIL comes from the Greek word meaning “love.” In philosophy, it's joined with sophia,
“wisdom,” so philosophy means literally “love of wisdom.” When joined with biblio-, “book,” the
result is bibliophile, or “lover of books.” And Philadelphia, containing the Greek word adelphos,
“brother,” was named by its Quaker founder, William Penn, as the city of “brotherly love.”


NEG and its variants nec- and ne- are prefixes of denial or refusal in Latin, and the Latin verb
negare means “to say no.” To negate something is to make it ineffective, and something
negative denies, contradicts, refuses, or reverses.

DEC comes from both Greek and Latin and means “ten.” So a decade lasts for ten years; the
decimal system is based on ten; and a decahedron is a geometrical shape with ten sides.

CENT, from the Latin centum, means “one hundred.” A dollar is made up of a hundred cents,
though other monetary systems use centavos or centimes as the smallest coin. A centipede
has what appears to be a hundred feet, though the actual number varies greatly. But there
really are a hundred years in a century.

NOM comes from the Latin word for “name.” A nominee is a person “named”—or nominated—
to run for or serve in office. A binomial (“two names”) is the scientific name for a species: Felis
catus for the house cat, for example. A polynomial, with “many names,” is an algebra
expression involving several terms: 2x2 + 9y – z3, for instance.

PATER/PATR comes from both the Greek and the Latin word for “father.” So a patron, for
example, is someone who assumes a fatherly role toward an institution or project or individual,
giving moral and financial support.

LEGA comes from the Latin legare, meaning “to appoint” or “to send as a deputy.” The same
root actually shows up in such words as legal—but how the law connects with sending
deputies can get awfully complicated and probably isn't worth going into.

GREG comes from the Latin grex, “herd” or “flock.” Bees, starlings, cows—any creatures that
like to live together in flocks or herds—are called gregarious, and the same word is used for
people who enjoy companionship and are happiest when they're in the middle of a rowdy herd.


FLU comes from the Latin verb fluere, “to flow.” So a flume is a narrow gorge with a stream
flowing through it. A fluent speaker is one from whom words flow easily. Influence originally
referred to an invisible fluid that was believed to flow from the stars and to affect the actions
of humans. A mysterious outbreak of disease in 15th-century Italy led Italians to blame it on
the stars' influenza—and the name stuck.

PREHEND/PREHENS comes from the Latin verb prehendere, “to seize.” Most of the English
words where it appears are closely related to the ones discussed below.

TEMPER comes from the Latin verb temperare, “to moderate or keep within limits” or “to mix.”
Most of the world's people live in the temperate zone—that is, the zone where the temperature
is moderate, between the hot tropics and the icy Arctic and Antarctic Circles. It's less easy to
see how we get temperature from this root; the word actually used to refer to the mixing of
different basic elements in the body, and only slowly came to mean how hot or cold that body
was.

PURG comes from the Latin verb purgare, “to clean or cleanse.” Almost all the English words
where it shows up are closely related to those discussed below.

MILL means either “a thousand” or “a thousandth.” A millennium is a thousand years, and a
million is a thousand thousands. But a milligram is a thousandth of a gram, a milliliter a
thousandth of a liter, and a millimeter a thousandth of a meter.

HEMI/SEMI means “half.” Hemi- comes from Greek, semi- from Latin. A hemisphere is half a
sphere, and a semicircle is half a circle. (The French prefix demi-, which probably developed
from Latin as well, also means “half”—as in demitasse, a little after-dinner coffee cup half the
size of a regular cup.)

SUB means “under.” So a subway runs under the streets, and a submarine moves under the
ocean's surface. A subject is a person under the authority of another. A movie's subplot is
lower in importance than the main plot. Subscribe once meant “to write one's name
underneath,” so subscription was the act of signing a document or agreement.

HYPER is a Greek prefix that means “above or beyond,” so hyper- often means about the
same thing as super-. Hyperinflation is inflation that's growing at a very high rate. To be
hypercritical or hypersensitive is to be critical or sensitive beyond the normal. And if you
hyperextend a knee or elbow, it means you're actually bending it backward.

PRE, one of the most common of all English prefixes, comes from prae, the Latin word meaning
“before” or “in front of.” So a prediction forecasts what will happen before it occurs. The 5:00
TV news precedes the 6:00 news. And someone with a prejudice against a class of people has
judged them before having even met them.

PARA is a Greek prefix usually meaning “beside” or “closely related to.” So parallel lines run
beside each other. And a Greek paragraphos was originally a line written beside the main text
of a play to show where a new person begins speaking; today we just start a new paragraph
on a new line.

META is a prefix in English that generally means “behind” or “beyond.” In medicine, for
example, the metacarpal bones are the hand bones that come right after, or beyond, the
carpal or wrist bones. And metalanguage is language used to talk about language, which
requires going beyond normal language.

PER is a Latin preposition that generally means “through,” “throughout,” or “thoroughly.” Thus,
perforate means “to bore through,” perennial means “throughout the years,” and permanent
means “remaining throughout.” And the “thoroughly” sense shows up in persuade, for
“thoroughly advise,” and perverted, “thoroughly turned around.”

ANT/ANTI is a Latin prefix meaning “against.” An anticlimax is the opposite of a climax. An
antiseptic or antibiotic fights germs. An antacid attacks acid in the stomach. And an antidote
works against the effects of a poison.

CONTRA is the Latin equivalent of anti-, and it too means essentially “against” or “contrary
to.” A contrast “stands against” something else that it's compared to. And contrapuntal music,
as in the music of Bach, sets one melody against another played at the same time and
produces harmony (which no one is opposed to).

ACER/ACR comes from the Latin adjective acer, meaning “sharp” or “sour.” Grapefruit and
limes have an acid taste; acid can also describe a person's sense of humor (other words for it
might be sharp or biting). The acidity of the soil often indicates whether it's good for growing
certain crops; blueberries, for instance, love acid soil, so they're more likely to be found east of
the Mississippi River, where acid soil is the rule.

STRICT comes from the Latin verb meaning “to draw tight, bind, or tie.” So the English word
strict means “tightly controlled.” And when someone begins a sentence “Strictly speaking, . . .”
you know he or she is going to be talking about a word or idea in its most limited sense,
“drawing tight” the meaning till it's as narrow as possible.

STRU/STRUCT comes from the Latin verb struere, meaning “to put together, build, arrange.” A
structure is something that's been constructed,—that is, built or put together. Instructions tell
how the pieces should be arranged. Something that obstructs is a barrier that's been “built” to
stand in your way. And something destructive “unbuilds.”

TORT comes from a form of the Latin verb torquere, meaning “to twist, wind, or wrench.” In
torture, parts of the body may be wrenched or twisted or stretched; so those “Indian sunburns”
that schoolkids give by twisting in different directions on some unlucky guy's wrist stay pretty
close to torture's original meaning.

VIV comes from vivere, the Latin verb meaning “to live or be alive.” A survivor has lived through
something terrible. A revival brings something back to life, whether it's an old film, interest in a
long-dead novelist, or religious enthusiasm in a group, maybe in a huge tent in the countryside.

SERV means “to be subject to.” A servant is the person who serves you with meals and
provides other necessary services. A tennis or volleyball serve puts the ball in play, much as a
servant puts food on the table.

CLUS comes from the Latin claudere, “to close.” Words based on the Latin verb often have
forms in which the d becomes an s. So, for example, include, which once meant “to shut up or
enclose” and now means “to contain,” has the related word inclusive, which means “including
everything.”

TEXT comes from a Latin verb that means “to weave.” So a textile is a woven or knitted cloth.
The material it's made from determines its texture, the smoothness or roughness of its surface.
And individual words are “woven” into sentences and paragraphs to form a text.

PLAC comes from the Latin placere, “to please or be agreeable to,” or placare, “to soothe or
calm.” Pleasant, pleasurable, and pleasing all derive from this root, even though their spelling
makes it hard to see.

AUT/AUTO comes from the Greek word for “same” or “self.” Something automatic operates by
itself, and an automobile moves by itself, without the help of a horse. An autograph is in the
handwriting of the person him- or herself, and an autopsy is an inspection of a corpse by an
examiner's own eyes.

GRAT comes from the Latin words gratus, meaning “pleasing, welcome, or agreeable,” and
gratia, meaning “grace, agreeableness, or pleasantness.” A meal that's served graciously will
be received with gratitude by grateful guests; those who show no appreciation could be called
ingrates.

CLAM/CLAIM comes from the Latin verb clamare, meaning “to shout or cry out.” To claim
often means “to call for.” And an exclamation is a cry of shock, joy, or surprise.

CRAC/CRAT comes from the Greek word meaning “power.” Attached to another root, it
indicates which group holds the power. With demos, the Greek word for “people,” it forms
democracy, a form of government in which the people rule. A theocracy, from the Greek theos,
“god,” is government based on divine guidance. In a meritocracy, people earn power by their
own merit.

PUNC comes from the Latin noun punctum, meaning “point.” A period is a form of punctuation
that's literally a point, and a punctured tire has been pricked by a sharp point.

POT comes from the Latin adjective potens, meaning “able.” Our English word potent means
“powerful” or “effective,” whether for good or bad. A potent new antibiotic might be able to
deal with infections that have developed resistance to older drugs; an industrial gas might be
identified as a potent contributor to climate change; and a potent drink might leave you
staggering.

MAND comes from mandare, Latin for “entrust” or “order.” A command is an order; a
commandment is also an order, but usually one that comes from God. And a commando unit
carries out orders for special military actions.

UND comes into English from the Latin words unda, “wave,” and undare, “to rise in waves,” “to
surge or flood.” Undulations are waves or wavelike things or motions, and to undulate is to rise
and fall in a wavelike way.

SANCT, meaning “holy,” comes from the Latin word sanctus. Thus, sanctity means “holiness.”
In ancient Greece, a spot could be sanctified, or “made holy,” by a group of priests who carried
out a solemn ritual; these might be spots where fumes arose from a crack in the earth or where
a spring of clear water flowed out of the ground, and a temple might be built there for worship
of a god.

LOQU comes from the Latin verb loqui, “to talk.” An eloquent preacher speaks fluently,
forcefully, and expressively. And a dummy's words come out of a ventriloquist's mouth—or
perhaps out of his belly (in Latin, venter).

VIR is Latin for “man.” A virtue is a good quality—originally, the kind of quality an ideal man
possessed. And virtuous behavior is morally excellent. All in all, the Romans seem to have
believed that being a man was a good thing.


VAL has as its basic meaning “strength,” from the Latin verb valere, meaning “to be worthy,
healthy, or strong” and “to have power or influence.” So evaluating a house involves
determining how healthy it is. A valid license or credit card is one that's still in effect, and a valid
proof is one that provides strong evidence.

CRE/CRET comes from the Latin verb crescere, which means both “to come into being” and
“to grow.” So a crescendo in music occurs when the music is growing louder, and a
decrescendo when it's growing softer.

FUS comes from the Latin verb fundere, “to pour out” or “to melt.” A fuse depends on melting
metal to break an overloaded circuit. Nuclear fusion involves the “melting” together of light
nuclei to form heavier nuclei, and fusion cuisine brings together the cooking of two or more
cultures.

VERB comes from the Latin verbum, meaning “word.” A verb—or action word—appears in
some form in every complete sentence. To express something verbally—or to verbalize
something—is to say it or write it.

SIMIL/SIMUL come from the Latin adjective similis, meaning “like, resembling, similar,” and the
verb simulare, “to make like.” Two similar things resemble each other. Two simultaneous
activities proceed at the same time. And a facsimile, such as you might receive from your fax
machine, looks exactly the same as the original.

SCEND comes from the Latin verb scandere, “to climb.” The staircase we ascend to our
bedroom at night we will descend the next morning, since what goes up must come down.

ONYM comes from the Greek onyma, meaning “name, word.” An anonymous donor or writer is
one who isn't named. A synonym is a word with the same meaning as another word (see SYN).
And homonyms (see HOM/HOMO) are words that look and sound alike but aren't actually
related, such as well (“healthy”) and well (“a deep hole with water in it”).

SCRIB/SCRIP comes from the Latin verb scribere, “to write.” Scribble is an old word meaning
to write or draw carelessly. A written work that hasn't been published is a manuscript. And to
describe is to picture something in words.

FALL comes from the Latin verb fallere, “to deceive.” It's actually at the root of the word false,
which we rarely use today to mean “deceptive,” though that meaning does show up in older
phrases: “Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor,” for instance, or “A falsehearted
lover will send you to your grave.” Fallere is even at the root of fail and fault, though
you might not guess it to look at them.

SOLU comes from the Latin verb solvere, “to loosen, free, release,” and the root therefore may
take the form solv- as well. So to solve a problem means to find its solution, as if you were
freeing up a logjam. And a solvent is a chemical that dissolves or “loosens up” oil or paint.

HYDR flows from the Greek word for “water.” The “water” root can be found in the lovely
flower called the hydrangea: its seed capsules resemble ancient Greek water vessels.

MUR, from the Latin noun murus, meaning “wall,” has produced a modest number of English words.

POLIS/POLIT comes from the Greek word for “city.” The ancient Greek city-states, such as Athens, Thebes, and Sparta, operated much like separate nations, so all their politics was local, like all their public policy—and even all their police!

NUMER comes from the Latin words meaning “number” and “to count.” A numeral is the symbol that represents a number. Numerous means “many,” and innumerable means “count less.” Numerical superiority is superiority in numbers, and your numerical standing in a class is a ranking expressed as a number.

KILO is the French version of the Greek word chilioi, meaning “thousand.” France is also where the metric system originated, in the years following the French Revolution. So in English, kiloshows up chiefly in metric-system units. Before the computer age, the most familiar kilo- words for English-speakers were probably kilowatt, meaning “1,000 watts,” and kilowatt-hour, meaning the amount of energy equal to one kilowatt over the course of an hour.

MICRO, from the Greek mikros, meaning “small,” is a popular English prefix. A microscope lets the eye see microscopic objects, and libraries store the pages of old newspapers on microfilm at 1/400th of their original size. And we continue to attach micro- to lots of familiar words; most of us could figure out the meaning of microbus and microquake without ever having heard them before. Scientists often use micro- to mean “millionth”; thus, a microsecond is a millionth of a second, and a micrometer is a millionth of a meter.

MULTI comes from the Latin word multus, meaning “many.” Thus, a multicultural society is one
that includes people of several different countries, languages, and religions; a multimedia
artwork uses two or more artistic media (dance, music, film, spoken text, etc.); and a multitude
of complaints reaching your office would be a great many indeed.

PAR, from the Latin, means “equal.” Our English word par means an amount taken as an
average or a standard, and especially the standard score for each hole on a golf course—
which is why the phrase “par for the course” means “about as well as expected.” We compare
things to see if they're equal; similar things can be called comparable—that is, “equal with.”
And “on a par with” means “comparable to.”

PHOB comes from the Greek noun phobos, “fear,” and it shows up clearly in our noun phobia,
meaning “unusual fear of a specific thing.” Phobias vary greatly in seriousness and also in
frequency. Most of us have experienced claustrophobia at some time, but few truly suffer from
fear of the number 13, a condition known as triskaidekaphobia.

HEM/HEMO comes from the Greek word for “blood” and is found at the beginning of many
medical terms. By dropping the h-, the same word produced the suffix -emia, which likewise
shows up in lots of “blood” words, including anemia, leukemia and hyperglycemia.

ITIS, a suffix found in both Greek and Latin, means “disease” or “inflammation.” In appendicitis
your appendix is swollen and painful, and in tonsillitis the same is true of your tonsils. With
laryngitis, your throat and larynx may become so sore that it's difficult to talk. Some of us enjoy
making up our own -itis words; high-school teachers, for example, long ago noticed that many
of their seniors tended to lose all interest in schoolwork and start skipping classes, and labeled
the condition senioritis.

NANO comes from the Greek nanos, meaning “dwarf.” For a prefix meaning “small,” English got
by for centuries with the Greek micro-, and later mini- came to be used widely as well. But only
recently, as a result of advances in scientific knowledge and technology, has there been a
need for a prefix meaning “extremely small”—a need that's been filled by nano-, which today is
being attached to all kinds of words, sometimes not very seriously (nanoskirt, nano-brained,
etc.).

SUPER, a Latin prefix meaning “over, higher, more than,” has become one of the most familiar
prefixes in English, one of those prefixes that we use to create new words all the time:
supermodel, superpowerful, superjock, supersize, supersweet—the list goes on and on. This all
seems to have started in 1903 when the playwright G. B. Shaw translated the German word
Übermensch, Nietzsche's famous term for the person who rises to heroic heights through
discipline and creative power, in the title of his play Man and Superman. The comic-book
character with the same name wouldn't make his appearance for another 30 years.

DE in Latin means “down, away.” So a descent is a downward slope or climb, and a decline is a
downward slide (of health, income, etc.). To devalue something is to take value away from it.
And you might describe a depressed friend as “down.”

NUL/NULL comes from the Latin word nullus, “none,” which is itself a combination of ne-
(“not”) and ullus (“any”). Have you ever noticed how many of our negative words start with n-?
Think of no, not, never, nothing, none, no one, nowhere, and the hundreds of non- words—just
about all of which go back to the same Greek root.

ARM comes from the Latin arma, meaning “weapons, tools.” The root is seen in such English
words as arms (i.e., weapons), armed, and army. It has nothing to do with the limb that starts at
your shoulder; the name for that kind of arm comes from the Latin word meaning “shoulder.”

SURG comes from the Latin verb surgere, meaning “to rise, spring up.” Our noun surge means
“a sudden, large increase,” and the verb surge means “to move with a surge.” A storm surge
occurs when violent storm winds at sea cause the water to pile up higher than normal sea
level. A surge protector keeps a spike in electrical current from “frying” your computer when a
lightning strike sends a sudden surge down the wires.

STRAT comes from the Latin word stratum, meaning “spread” or “bed.” Strata, a form of the
same word, came to be used by the Romans to mean “paved road”—that is, street.

LATER comes from the Latin adjective lateralis, meaning “side.” The noun for “side” in Latin
w a s latus, and the same word served as an adjective meaning “wide.” The relationship
between the two isn't hard to spot, since something wide extends far out to its sides. So lines
of latitude extend east-west around the earth, in the dimension we tend to think of as its width
(unlike lines of longitude, which extend north-south, in the dimension that, for some reason, we
decided to think of as its “length”).

TOM comes from the Greek root meaning “cut.” Thus, the Latin word anatomia, from which we
get anatomy, means “dissection”—that is cutting or separating the parts of an organism for
detailed examination. In a lobotomy, the nerves linking a brain lobe to the rest of the brain are
removed; even though lobotomies have hardly been performed in the last 50 years, the idea
can still fill us with horror.

IATR, from the Greek iatros, “healer, physician,” usually hides in the middle of words, where it
isn't immediately noticed. A pediatrician treats children (see PED-). A psychiatrist is a physician
who treats mental problems. (A psychologist, by contrast, doesn't have a medical degree and
thus can't prescribe drugs.) And a physiatrist is a doctor who practices “physical medicine and
rehabilitation,” which may involve such things as testing various physical abilities, relieving pain
through electric heat or massage, or training patients to exercise or to use an artificial limb.

MEDI comes from the Latin medius, meaning “middle.” Our word medium refers to something
in a middle position. The medieval period of European history, also known as the Middle Ages,
is the period between Greek and Roman antiquity and the “modern age.” But why people
around 1620 began to use the term “Middle Ages,” because they regarded themselves as
modern, is an interesting question.

OID comes from the Greek word for “appearance” or “form.” Since aster in ancient Greek
meant “star,” the small bodies orbiting between Mars and Jupiter that looked like stars through
primitive telescopes were called asteroids. A factoid is a little bit of information that looks like a
fact, whether it is or not. And some people these days will attach -oid to just about anything;
you can probably figure out the meaning of nutsoid, nerdoid, and freakazoid without much
help.

SCOP, which usually appears in a suffix, comes from the Greek skopein, meaning “to look at.”
In English we have the simple noun scope, along with some other words it sometimes stands
for: telescope, microscope, periscope, and so on. And have you ever used a stereoscope, a
device your great-grandparents probably enjoyed, which lets you look through a viewer at two
slightly different photographs of the same thing, one with each eye, to enjoy the illusion that
you're seeing it in three dimensions?

TRANS comes from Latin to indicate movement “through, across, or beyond” something.
Translation carries a writer's meaning from one language to another. A television signal is sent
or transmitted through the air (or a cable) to your set. When making your way through a city on
public transportation, you may have to transfer from one bus or subway to another.

PRO is an important prefix, with a couple of quite different broad meanings. In this section, we'll
look at words in which pro- has the basic meaning “for” or “favoring.” Everyone knows words
lik e pro-democracy and pro-American, but other pro- words may not be quite so selfexplanatory.

PRO, in its other broad meaning, means “before, in front of.” So, for example, to proceed means
“to move out in front”; to progress means to “to move forward”; and somebody prominent
stands out, as if he or she were actually standing out in front of the crowd.

RE is a prefix which, like pro- (see PRO), has more than one meaning. In this section, we'll focus
on the meaning “again.” We use re- words with this meaning every day—redo, reheat, recheck,
reread, resell, repaint, etc.—and we feel free to make up new ones as needed. But in plenty of
other re- words, the meaning isn't so obvious.

RE-, in its other main sense, means “back” or backward.” Since doing something again means
going back to it, the two senses are actually related; still, the meaning of re- in most words is
pretty clearly one or the other. So a rebound comes back at you; to recall means to “call back”
a memory; and to react is to “act back” at someone else's action.

DERM comes from the Greek derma, meaning “skin.” For medical advice on a skin problem
such as acne, we may go to a dermatologist, or skin specialist. When we get a shot, it's usually
with a hypodermic, a needle that goes “under the skin” (see HYP/HYPO). A pachyderm is a
“thick-skinned” animal, which most of us just call an elephant.

ENDO comes from the Greek endon, meaning “within.” In English it appears almost always in
scientific terms, especially in biology. A nonscientific endo- word is endogamy, meaning
marriage within a specific group as required by custom or law—one of the many customs that
can be seen everywhere from the most remote tribes to the highest society in wealthy
countries.

NECRO comes from the Greek nekros, meaning “dead body,” so it's not surprising that it
shows up in some unappetizing places. A necrophagous insect, for instance, is one that feeds
on dead bodies; when homicide investigators discover a corpse, they may use the insect
evidence to figure out when the person died.

PALEO comes from the Greek palaios, meaning “ancient”—that is, “older than old.” The prefix
sometimes gets attached to very recognizable words; paleobiology, for instance, deals with
the biology of fossil organisms, paleogeography is the study of geography in earlier geological
eras, and paleoecology is the study of the relationship of plants and animals to their
environment in those eras.

CIRCU/CIRCUM comes from the Latin circus, meaning “circle.” So a circus is traditionally held
under a round tent. A circuit can be a tour around an area or territory, or the complete path of
an electric current. To circumnavigate means “to navigate around”—often around the world.

MINI/MINU come from Latin words meaning “small” and “least.” So the minimum is the least,
and a minute amount is almost nothing. And mini- is all too familiar as a prefix that we've been
applying to all kinds of things since the 1950s: minivan, miniskirt, mini-mart, minipark, and the
rest.

INTER comes straight from Latin. In English it has various meanings; all of them can be
expressed broadly as “between,” but they're still quite distinct: “moving between” (intercity),
“communicating between” (intercom), “coming between” (intercept), and so on. No wonder so
many English words begin with inter-.

SUR is actually a shortening of the Latin prefix super-, meaning “over, above” (see SUPER),
and has the same meaning. A surface is the face above or on the outside of something. A
surplus is something above and beyond what is needed. And to survey a landscape is to look
out over it.

CO is a Latin prefix that generally means “with, together,” and we see it daily in such words as
costar, cofounder, co-owner, and coworker. But many other co- words aren't quite so easy to
understand when you first encounter them.

SYN is a Greek and Latin prefix meaning “together” or “at the same time.” So “in sync” (short
for “in synchronization”) means “together in time.” And a synonym is a word that can be
considered together with another word since it has the same meaning.

TOXI comes from the Greek and Latin words for “poison,” something the Greeks and Romans
knew a good deal about. Socrates died by taking a solution of poison hemlock, a flowering
plant much like wild carrot that now also grows in the U.S. Rome's enemy Mithridates, king of
Pontus, was obsessed with poisons, experimented with them on prisoners, and tried to make
himself immune to them by eating tiny amounts of them daily. Nero's mother Agrippina
poisoned several of her son's rivals to power—and probably did the same to her own husband,
the emperor Claudius.

TEN/TENU comes from the Latin tenuis, meaning “thin.” So to extend something is to stretch
it, and lots of things get thin when they're stretched. The ten- root is even seen in pretend,
which once meant to stretch something out above or in front; that something came to be a
claim that you were something that you actually weren't.

TECHNI/TECHNO comes from the Greek techne, meaning “art, craft, skill,” and shows up in
dozens of English words. Some, such as technical, technology, and technique, have long been
familiar. Others, such as techno-thriller, were only coined in the current computer age, which
has also seen the new cut-down terms techno (for techno-pop, the electronic dance music)
and tech (for technician or technology).

LONG comes from Latin longus, which, as you might guess, means “long.” The English word
long shows up in many compound terms such as long-suffering (“patiently enduring lasting
offense or hardship”) and long-winded (“boringly long in speaking or writing”), but the long- root
also sometimes shows up less obviously. To prolong something is to lengthen it, for example,
and a chaise longue (not lounge!) is “a long reclining chair.”

IDIO comes from the Greek idios, meaning “one's own” or “private.” In Latin this root led to the
word idiota, meaning “ignorant person”—that is, a person who doesn't take in knowledge from
outside himself. And that led to a familiar English word that gets used too often, usually to
describe people who aren't ignorant at all.

AER/AERO comes from the Greek word for “air.” The aerospace industry manufactures
vehicles that travel through the atmosphere and beyond into space. Aerodynamic designs
move through the air with maximum speed. And aerophobia is the technical name for what we
usually just call fear of flying.

CAD comes from the Latin verb cadere, “to fall.” Thus, a cascade is usually a waterfall, but
sometimes a flood of something else that seems to pour on top of you: a cascade of new
problems, a cascade of honors, and so on.

TRIB comes from the Latin tribuere, meaning “to give” or “to pay.” So a group that distributes
food passes it out to those in need, and when you contribute to the group you give your money
or energy to it.

AMBI means “on both sides” or “around”; ambi- comes from Latin. Most of us are either righthanded
or left-handed, but ambidextrous people can use their right and left hand equally well.

EPI is a Greek prefix that may mean various things, but usually “on, over” or “attached to.” So
an earthquake's epicenter is the ground right over the center of the quake. And your epidermis
is the outer layer of your skin, on top of the inner dermis.

HYP/HYPO is a Greek prefix meaning “below, under.” Many hypo- words are medical. A
hypodermic needle injects medication under the skin. Hypotension, or low blood pressure, can
be just as unhealthy as the better-known hypertension, or high blood pressure.

THERM/THERMO comes from the Greek word meaning “warm.” A thermometer measures the
amount of warmth in a body, the air, or an oven. A thermostat makes sure the temperature
stays at the same level. And it's easy to see why the German manufacturers of a vacuuminsulated
bottle back in 1904 gave it the name Thermos.

POLY comes from polys, the Greek word for “many.” A polytechnic institute offers instruction
in many technical fields. Polygamy is marriage in which one has many spouses, or at least more
than the legal limit of one. And polysyllabic words are words of many syllables—of which there
are quite a few in this book.

PRIM comes from primus, the Latin word for “first.” Something primary is first in time, rank, or
importance. Something primitive is in its first stage of development. And something primeval
had its origin in the first period of world or human history.

HOM/HOMO comes from homos, the Greek word for “same,” which in English words may also
mean “similar.” A homograph is a word spelled like another word but different in meaning or
pronunciation, and a homosexual is a person who favors others of the same sex. (This root has
nothing to do with the Latin homo, meaning “person,” as in Homo sapiens, the French homme,
and the Spanish hombre.)

DIS comes from Latin, where it means “apart.” In English, its meanings have increased to
include “opposite” or “not” (as in distaste, disagreeable), “deprive of” (disinfect), or “exclude or
expel from” (disbar). The original meaning can still be seen in a word like dissipate, which
means “to break up and scatter.”

MANIA in Latin means “madness,” and the meaning passed over into English unchanged. Our
word mania can mean a mental illness, or at least an excessive enthusiasm. We might call
someone a maniac who was wild, violent, and mentally ill—or maybe just really enthusiastic
about something. Too much caffeine might make you a bit manic. But the intense mood
swings once known as manic-depressive illness are now usually called bipolar disorder
instead.

PSYCH comes from the Greek word psyche, meaning “breath, life, soul.” Psychology is the
science of mind and behavior, and a psychologist treats or studies the mental problems of
individuals and groups. Psychiatry is a branch of medicine that deals with mental and emotional
disorders, and a psychiatrist (like any other doctor) may prescribe drugs to treat them.

CEPT comes from the Latin verb meaning “take, seize.” Capture, which is what a captor has
done to a captive, has the same meaning. Captivate once meant literally “capture,” but now
means only to capture mentally through charm or appeal. But in some other English words this
root produces, such as those below, its meaning is harder to find.

FIN comes from the Latin word for “end” or “boundary.” Final describes last things, and a finale
or a finish is an ending. (And at the end of a French film, you may just see the word “Fin.”) But
its meaning is harder to trace in some of the other English words derived from it.

JECT comes from jacere, the Latin verb meaning “throw” or “hurl.” To reject something is to
throw (or push) it back; to eject something is to throw (or drive) it out; and to inject something
is to throw (or squirt) it into something else.

TRACT comes from trahere, the Latin verb meaning “drag or draw.” Something attractive
draws us toward it. Something distracting pulls your attention away. And when you extract
something from behind the sofa, you drag it out.

DUC/DUCT, from the Latin verb ducere, “to lead,” shows up regularly in English. Duke means
basically “leader.” The Italian dictator Mussolini was known simply as Il Duce, “the leader.” But
such words as produce and reduce also contain the root, even though their meanings show it
less clearly.

SEQU comes from the Latin verb sequi, meaning “to follow.” A sequel follows the original
novel, film, or television show.

BENE is Latin for “well.” A benefit is a good result or effect. Something beneficial produces
good results or effects. The Latin root can be heard in other languages as well: “Good!” or
“Fine!” in Spanish is “Bueno!”; in French, it's “Bon!”; and in Italian, just say “Bene!”

AM comes from the Latin amare, “to love.” The Roman god of love was known by two different
names, Cupid and Amor. Amiable means “friendly or good-natured,” and amigo is Spanish for
“friend.”

BELL comes from the Latin word meaning “war.” Bellona was the little-known Roman
goddess of war; her husband, Mars, was the god of war.

PAC is related to the Latin words for “agree” and “peace.” The Pacific Ocean—that is, the
“Peaceful Ocean”—was named by Ferdinand Magellan because it seemed so calm after he
had sailed through the storms near Cape Horn. (Magellan obviously had never witnessed a
Pacific typhoon.)

CRIM comes from the Latin words for “fault or crime” or “accusation.” It's obvious where the
root shows up most commonly in English. A crime is an act forbidden by the government, which
the government itself will punish you for, and for which you may be branded a criminal. A crime
is usually more serious than a tort (see TORT), a “civil wrong” for which the wronged person
must himself sue if he wants to get repaid in some way.

PROB comes from the Latin words for “prove or proof” and “honesty or integrity.” A probe,
whether it's a little object for testing electrical circuits or a spacecraft headed for Mars, is
basically something that's looking for evidence or proof. And probable originally described
something that wasn't certain but might be “provable.”

GRAV comes from the Latin word meaning “heavy, weighty, serious.” Gravity is, of course,
what makes things heavy, and without it there wouldn't be any life on earth, since nothing
would stay on earth at all. This doesn't stop us from yelling in outrage when the familiar laws of
gravity cause something to drop to the floor and break.

LEV comes from the Latin adjective levis, meaning “light,” and the verb levare, meaning “to
raise or lighten.” So a lever is a bar used to lift something, by means of leverage. And levitation
is the magician's trick in which a body seems to rise into the air by itself
















